+++
title = "LixCon in 2026"
author = "Lix Team"
date = "2025-11-05"
+++

### LixCon 2026 -- this coming April, in Paris

We won't bury the lede: we're super excited to announce that our first **LixCon** will take place **from the 17th to 19th of April, 2026, in Paris!** In the past year, we've seen a lot of new and old faces tackle huge challenges to build the foundation for a next-generation Nix interpreter. It's only fitting that we finally provide an opportunity for contributors, collaborators, and curious friends to join together for three days of development, hacking and sharing knowledge.

If you've been in the Nix ecosystem for a few years now, you may recall [DGNum](https://dgnum.eu), whose help with organization and hosting made NixCon 2022 (Paris) a reality. We're grateful to announce they're back -- and will be leading the charge to organize LixCon 2026! 

LixCon isn't a competitor to NixCon -- rather than a general event about the Nix community and its projects, LixCon is laser-focused on the _interpreter_ and its internals. It'll be a chance to get into in-depth discussions, deep-dive into interpreter-related topics, discuss future visions for the Nix language, and get hacking!

**What should I bring?** 
Most importantly, bring yourself, your enthusiasm, and your ideas! In addition to talks, the event will provide days heavily focused on development, discussion, and hacking on things together -- so bring whatever hardware best enables you to code!

**How big are we talking? And who should I expect?**
To further our goal of hosting face-to-face discussions and development time, we've decided to keep the event small -- expect a maximum of 200 people. And while the event is Lix-focused, we're also inviting our friends from Guix and other Nix-inspired projects (like [zb](https://github.com/256lights/zb) and [Elpe](https://pijul.org/posts/2025-06-08-elpe/)) to join us and take the opportunity to share their ideas and work.

**Will there be talks?**
We're all brimming with cool ideas and projects; and the first day of the conference will provide an opportunity for people to share what they've been thinking about, working on, or want to share. But we find the real value of gathering people together is providing the opportunity for collaboration -- and so we're limiting talks to the first day, and focusing the remainder on hands-on work and discussions, and will be recording talks so you don't miss anything if you're too busy hacking!

**I have so many questions!**
Awesome! Feel free to reach out to `lixcon AT lix.systems`, or to drop questions in the usual community spaces.

**TL;DR**: If you're craving in-depth content about the interpreter and everything surrounding it, LixCon is for you.

**Tickets are available** at the following URL: https://pretix.dgnum.eu/lixcon2026
Our **CFP** will follow shortly.

And hey -- thanks! We wouldn't be here without you. <3
