+++
title = "Announcing Lix 2.95 “Kakigōri”"
author = "Lix Team"
date = "2026-03-25"
+++

We at the Lix team are proud to announce our sixth major release, version 2.95 “Kakigōri”.

This release focuses on long-awaited bugfixes, quality-of-life improvements, documentation, performance improvements and continued integration of Lix with the [Cap'n'Proto remote procedure call](https://capnproto.org/) runtime to replace the previous bespoke implementation.

> [Kakigōri](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kakig%C5%8Dri) is a Japanese shaved ice dessert flavored with syrup and a sweetener, often condensed milk.

Lix is a Nix implementation focused on reliability, predictability, friendliness, developed by a community of people from around the world. We have long term plans to incrementally evolve Nix to work in more places, to make it more reliable and secure, and to update the language and semantics to correct past mistakes and reduce errors, all the while providing an amazing tooling experience.

## Upgrading from CppNix or previous Lix versions

**WARNING**: We do not recommend to use `nix upgrade-nix`, please follow the instructions in <https://lix.systems/install/> with the Lix's upgrade shell script.

The upgrade procedure depends on how you installed Lix or CppNix, and is fully described in the [Lix installation guide](https://lix.systems/install/).

If you are using Lix from nixpkgs on NixOS, you just need to upgrade your nixpkgs once the upgrade pull request has passed through the build farm into your channel; no other action is required.

If you want to help us test the next version of Lix, consider running `main` by following the [beta guide](https://wiki.lix.systems/books/lix-contributors/page/lix-beta-guide).

## Changes

Lix 2.95 builds on the work from Lix 2.94 in improving the daemon and language to make room for future evolution.

In this release Lix has fixed a number of long-running bugs, and we intend to continue this trend. We aim to have only very few longstanding bugs remaining by the time we hit Lix 3.0.

Here is a tasting menu of changes in Lix 2.95 that we think are the most exciting. This is by no means a complete list, otherwise this post would be huge. If you're interested in the full list, please refer to the [release notes](https://docs.lix.systems/manual/lix/stable/release-notes/rl-2.95.html).

### News from RPC

RPC work is ongoing behind the scenes. Lix 2.95 ships with internal changes required to create multiple daemon sockets with different protocols on each, and we intend to make use of this to expose new protocols as they become ready.

Previous releases confirmed that using Cap'n'Proto is feasible, and we've gained experience exchanging information between Lix and its helper programs via Cap'n'Proto RPC mechanisms. In the 2.96 development cycle we will build on this knowledge to add a new—experimental, for now—RPC protocol for connections to the local daemon. As we gain confidence in our implementation we also want to enable this protocol for remote builds, and ultimately replace the `ssh://` and `ssh-ng://` remote store URI schemes.

### Flakes go arctic

Lix 2.94 has frozen Flakes, and 2.95 has used this freeze to take the first few steps towards extracting Flakes from Lix core into a plugin. The extraction is proving much more difficult than expected due to many interdependencies between Flakes behaviors, the CLI parser and its quirks, the configuration system, and how deeply engrained Flakes are in the current design of Lix itself.

We have made some progress nonetheless, but we are still far from done. We aim to not only extract Flakes from the core code, but to also make it possible for other projects to use the same mechanisms to add their own, Flakes-like, interfaces to Lix. Why should `nix build` not be able to understand [npins](https://github.com/andir/npins)-based repositories? It should! And with a plugin, it will be able to. Eventually. Once the snow melts.

### Breaking changes

A significant amount of technical debt has been cleared to allow safer evolution of Lix.

- This release cycle features a new batch of deprecated (anti-)features.
  You can opt-in into the old behavior with `--extra-deprecated-features` or any equivalent configuration option.
  View all deprecated features [in the manual](https://docs.lix.systems/manual/lix/stable/contributing/deprecated-features.html#currently-available-deprecated-features).

  - `broken-string-indentation`: Indented strings (those starting with  `''`) might produce unintended results due to how the whitespace stripping is done. Those cases will now warn the user.
  - `broken-string-escape`: "Escaped" characters without a properly defined escape sequence evaluate to "themselves". This is in most cases unintended behaviour, both for writing regexes, and using legacy or uncommon escape sequences like `\f`. The user will now be warned, if those are present.
  - `floating-without-zero`: Previously, it was possible to declare a float using something like `.123`. This can cause confusion about accessing attributes. Floating point numbers must now always include the leading zero, i.e. `0.123`
  - `rec-set-merges` Attribute sets like `{ foo = {}; foo.bar = 42;}` implicitly merge at parse time, however if one of them is marked as recursive but not the others then the recursive attribute may get lost (order-dependent). Therefore, merging attrs with mixed-`rec` is now forbidden.
  - `rec-set-dynamic-attrs`: Dynamic attributes have weird semantics in the presence of recursive attrsets (they evaluate *after* the rest of the set). This is now forbidden.
  - `or-as-identifier` `or` as an identifier has always been weird since the `or` (almost-)keyword has been introduced. We are deprecating the backcompat hacks from the early days of Nix in favor of making `or` a full and proper keyword.
  - `tokens-no-whitespace`: Function applications without space around the arguments like `0a`, `0.00.0` or `foo"1"2` are now forbidden. The same applies to list elements. The primary reason for this deprecation is to remove foot guns around surprising tokenization rules regarding number literals, but this will also free up some syntax for other purposes (e.g. `r""` strings) for reuse at some point in the future.
  - `shadow-internal-symbols`: has been expanded to also forbid shadowing `null`, `true` and `false`.
  - `ancient-let`: deprecation has been turned into a full parser error instead of a warning.
  - `rec-set-overrides`: deprecation has been turned into a full parser error instead of a warning.
  
  Many thanks to [piegames], [rootile (Rutile)], and [eldritch horrors].
  
- Daemon cache directory moved

  Previously the daemon stored its caches in `/root/.cache/nix`, now it stores them in `/var/cache/nix`. Storing caches in the root user home directory was never truly intentional, and never all that configurable either. Lix now respects system settings (such as set by systemd when setting `CacheDirectory` on the daemon unit) instead.
  
  Many thanks to [Raito Bezarius].
  
- `fetch-closure` experimental feature removed, and `builtins.fetchClosure` with it

  Since Lix removed CA derivations most of the inner workings of `fetchClosure` have become inaccessible, and the remainder was largely not an improvement over existing features (such importing store derivation). We've removed it to lighten the maintenance burden.
  
  Many thanks to [just1602].

### New features

- `builtins.warn` is now available to emit warnings during expression evaluation, and two new options `debugger-on-warn` and `abort-on-warn`  let you debug why warnings happen, or turn them into errors for all your CI needs.

  Many thanks to [Emilia Bopp](https://git.lix.systems/milibopp) and [Qyriad].

- `log-format` can now be set in `nix.conf`, and nix3 CLI commands default to printing logs instead of discarding them. No more `nix build -L / --log-format multiline-with-logs`! 

  Many thanks to [Qyriad].
  
- a better remote builder configuration mechanism

  Remote builders can be configured with [TOML](https://docs.lix.systems/manual/lix/stable/advanced-topics/distributed-builds.html) now! The old format is still supported, but we encourage all users to adopt the new format since it is clearer, more usable, and much more extensible.
  
  Many thanks to [rootile (Rutile)] and [Qyriad].
  
### Improvements

- Flakes untrusted settings questions are less obnoxious

  Any time a flake asks to apply settings it now asks for all of them at once first, with a list of settings it requested. You can accept or reject all settings at once, or handle each setting individually.
  
  Many thanks to [isabelroses], [Raito Bezarius] and [eldritch horrors].
  
- `keep-env-derivations` is now supported by the nix3 CLI

  This feature has been available for the nix2 CLI for a long time. The nix3 CLI now also supports it.
  
  Many thanks to [Raito Bezarius].
  
- `nix-shell` and `nix shell` provide nesting depth information

  Much like the `SHLVL` environment variable we all know and love (which counts how many shells deep you currently are), `nix-shell` and `nix shell` now expose a `NIX_SHELL_LEVEL` variable that does the same thing for nix shell environments.
  
  Many thanks to [Tom Hubrecht].

- The REPL pretty-prints derivations as attribute sets with limited depth now instead of printing only the store derivation path. This makes it much easier to inspect derivations in the REPL.

  Many thanks to [Lunaphied].

- improved build sandbox launch mechanisms

  Sandboxed builds are now *much* faster to launch on Linux, up to 80%! Whether (and how much) improvements you will see depends greatly on what kind of derivation graph you build. Graphs with many `runCommand` derivations (like NixOS systems) are likely to see a noticeable improvement. Larger graphs see disproportionately larger absolute savings.

  Many thanks to [eldritch horrors].
  
### Miscellanea

- daemons are fully socket-activated on Linux now

  As mentioned in the intro, daemons now use socket activation with instanced units instead of a single, global system daemon. This is required to make the `cgroups` experimental feature work well and allows much better monitoring of individual connections even without advanced monitoring features built into Lix itself. Care must be taken during upgrades to ensure that `nix-daemon@.service` is available, otherwise daemon connections will fail.
  
  Many thanks to [eldritch horrors].
  
### And all the rest

Many more changes and improvements have gone into Lix 2.95. The list is much too long to even summarize here; a great deal of work has gone into making Lix 2.95 one of our best releases to date.

## Known issues

- 2.95.0 can break your development shells if they make use of `nixConfig` and `nix print-dev-env`, upgrade to 2.95.1.
- 2.95.0 static builds are unable to build anything, upgrade to 2.95.1.

## What is planned for the future?

### Flakes

As mentioned before, Lix is freezing the Flakes feature set to extract it into an isolated plugin.

The Flakes implementation in Lix consist of two main parts:

* `libfetchers`: infrastructure for fetching and interacting with source trees, including the `fetchTree` builtin.
* CLI surface: `nix3` commands and flake-specific hooks (the installables).

Our first extraction effort focuses on moving Flakes-specific code from the Lix core into plugins, such as the search path logic that resolves `flake:` URIs.

Next we will gradually remove Flakes-related logic from `nix3` commands while ensuring that commands not compatible with plugins are handled safely. Once the CLI can operate without Flakes it will remain useful only for certain `--file` or `--expr` use cases unless some plugin that extends the CLI is loaded.

To restore CLI functionality, plugins can:

* register new installables (syntax elements that can be parsed into Nix values), e.g. file-based, inline expression, or flake-based. We will [introduce infrastructure](https://gerrit.lix.systems/c/lix/+/4957) for this purpose.
* add CLI flags and commands when Flakes is present. The current `nix3` CLI parser has design limitations, and 2.96 will invest in a new parser, possibly using Rust.

Once these functionalities are stabilized, Flakes can be offered as a plugin. Users who wish to continue using Flakes will be able to enable them in their profile manager of choice, e.g. by specifying

```nix
lix.plugins = ps: [ ps.flakes_v1 ];
```

Versioning plugins allows future improvements while maintaining backward compatibility. Challenges remain, such as versioning Flakes itself. We encourage the community to participate in solving these issues.

The next target after this is reworking will be `libfetchers` and redefining its role in Lix, in cooperation with our RPC efforts.

### News from Rust integration

Lix has historically included Rust in limited ways, such as the statically linked `lix-doc`. In 2.95, we pushed FFI capabilities further.

Two very important things happened during 2.95 cycle:

* We introduced [`rust-monocrate`](https://git.lix.systems/lix-project/lix/src/branch/main/lix/rust-monocrate): a Rust component inside Lix capable of calling C++ or C APIs, or being called from C++ via the C ABI.
* [Library unification](https://gerrit.lix.systems/c/lix/+/4940): we've merged all our shared libraries into a single, big, library to simplify Meson integration with Rust.

Experiments with [`cxx`](https://zulip.lix.systems/#narrow/channel/15-Rust/topic/cxx.20dependency/with/8257) are underway to evaluate its suitability for upcoming changes, such as rewriting the CLI parser and config system in Rust.

In the future we want to use Rust more and more in our codebase, first for user-facing changes where the better library ecosystem of the Rust world can have the most immediate impact, and for reliability of isolated small components (such as tarball decompression).

### Ongoing stabilization goals

Lix has several experimental features. Our focus is on first stabilizing those most critical for Lix itself.

#### Extended attribute support in the sandbox

During the 2.95 cycle we allowed extended attributes in the sandbox while preventing derivation outputs from writing them. This enabled testing UNIX ACLs for daemon sockets.

Testing showed that extended attribute support in the sandbox is impractical. Many programs assume access to more UIDs than the default three (`nobody`, `nixbld`, `root`) is possible and fail if this is not the case. Supporting extended attributes also requires `uid-range` for these programs, which is not yet feasible in standard sandboxes.

We still intend to make extended attributes available in the build sandbox but will be putting this effort on the back burner to resolve its dependencies first.

#### `auto-allocate-uids` and the `uid-range` system feature

`auto-allocate-uids` provides a way to assign a range of UIDs in the sandbox and exposes the `uid-range` system feature.

Previously tied to `cgroups` for safe sandbox cleanup, `auto-allocate-uids` now relies on stable `cgroups` support and will no longer work if `cgroups` are not also enabled. Linux lacks a standard API for allocating many UIDs, but systemd offers [`systemd-nsresourced`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd-nsresourced.service.html), which can provide delegated UIDs safely.

Stabilizing `auto-allocate-uids` will require systemd-nsresourced which [is being worked on in NixOS](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/404864).

#### `cgroups` experimental feature

Using `cgroups` correctly is complex due to a lack of standard APIs. Container engines often don't delegate cgroups according to any standard, creating UX issues.

When Lix runs without a daemon, sandboxing and cgroup delegation become tricky. Users can recover via `systemd-run` or `--no-use-cgroups`, but some software assumes direct store access and needs code adjustments.

Stabilization depends on resolving these UX challenges and improving compatibility with container engines.

## Want to help Lix? Consider donating to Lix!

Following Lix integration in AFNix, Lix now has [an Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/lix-project) and can receive donations.

We run infrastructure across x86_64-linux, aarch64-linux, and aarch64-darwin. Some of it is in-kind and sponsored. Current costs are around 100€/month.

If you value self-hosting and benefit from Lix, please consider donating. Every contribution helps sustain the project.

## Credits

Thanks, as always, to the following groups:

- The large community who beta tested the upcoming release by running `main` in production since the 2.95 branch-off. We really appreciate having immediate feedback on our work and the trust of running main alongside us means a lot to us. We know we tested the patience of some of you, we thank you for that.

    If you want to run Lix main yourself, see [the beta guide](https://wiki.lix.systems/books/lix-contributors/page/lix-beta-guide) for details.

- Everyone who contributed by filing bugs and giving us feedback on Matrix.

- All the first time contributors who made their first contributions to a Nix implementation in Lix. We are eternally grateful to everyone who helped us out on the numerous important but tedious issues.

- All the contributors who have helped us with the backlog of bugs.

- The CppNix contributors and CppNix team, without whom we would not have this software, and who wrote some of the improvements ported into this release.

Onwards and upwards for the next release. We look forward to continuing to work together with everyone to build a better foundation for the evolution of Nix.


[Qyriad]: https://git.lix.systems/Qyriad
[Lunaphied]: https://git.lix.systems/Lunaphied
[piegames]: https://git.lix.systems/piegames
[rootile (Rutile)]: https://git.lix.systems/rootile
[eldritch horrors]: https://git.lix.systems/pennae.
[Raito Bezarius]: https://git.lix.systems/raito
[just1602]: https://git.lix.systems/just1602
[isabelroses]: https://git.lix.systems/isabelroses
[Tom Hubrecht]: https://git.lix.systems/tom-hubrecht
